[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Asking the question, do you
believe in life after life?
>> Oh my.
Of course, I believe
in life after life.
>> I mean, what do you
think happens when you die?
>> I think that you go to heaven
and that the Lord accepts you.
And your body's
still here on Earth,
but your soul is up in heaven.
>> What do you think
happens when you die?
>> I don't believe in life
after death necessarily.
I do think there's a
lot we don't understand.
>> Is there life after life?
I really don't feel that there's
any way that we could possibly
know until we're there.
>> Yes, I definitely believe
that our soul is a very
powerful emotional thing.
And I just can't
believe that when
our body dies that
that's the end.
>> Do you believe
in life after life?
>> I do, yeah.
I've had a lot of
family members that
have had experiences with people
coming back after they've died.
So yeah, I do.
>> What do you think the
nature of the afterlife is?
>> I'm not sure.
I feel like people, maybe
their spirits still exist
and they're just kind of
with the people they love.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There are a
million ways to die.
Perhaps two million.
Perhaps even more.
In fact, we don't even know
how many ways there are to die.
But one thing we do know
is that a high percentage
of those who die have
what is commonly known
as a near-death experience.
Many people report
going up a tunnel
and seeing heavenly bodies
bathed in bright light.
And a good number
see their life flash
before them in a life
review, and even enter
a heavenly realm.
We have many representations
of near-death experiences
all around us.
Artists down through
history and in every culture
have been there to record
these heavenly encounters.
It's as though mankind takes
a common path to heaven
and always has.
I know all about
near-death experiences
because I have written about
them, nine books and all,
with a number of the
field's top researchers.
I have looked at death in many
ways and in many cultures.
Yet, funny thing,
in all the years
I have studied and
written about death,
I have rarely thought that
it would ever happen to me.
Most of the time I thought
that I would always
be here, a permanent
inhabitant of the living world.
What was it Sigmund Freud said?
"When we attempt
to imagine death,
we perceive ourselves
as spectators."
Like most everyone else, I, too,
imagined myself as a spectator.
I hid behind my writing,
safe from mortality.
I had a box seat in the stadium
of mankind, an eternal observer
in the game of life.
Then reality paid me a visit.
It was a beautiful day with
spectacular light and clean air
it was, as they say,
a good day to die.
I was out taking a walk
in the desert, when
out of nowhere, my heart
began to race fast and hard
like a runaway engine.
Before long, I was down and out.
In a lucid moment, I realized
that I could easily become
the subject of my own work.
I imagined what that would
be like by remembering
stories used in the
books I had written.
No longer did I believe
that the only thing
wrong with immortality was
that it goes on forever
or that it was a fate
worse than death.
I wanted real answers to
the age old question--
what happens when we die?
I decided to go to people who
knew firsthand what happens--
near-death experiencers.
Accidents or illness
had brought these people
to the brink of death.
They had looked
down into the abyss
and found it to be, well,
quite pleasant actually.
If not, why were they
laughing all the time?
I also went to researchers
who had analyzed thousands
of these near-death
experiences and who
had come up with some amazing
conclusions about God, heaven,
and the afterlife.
These were guys I had
written books with.
Funny, isn't it?
I always thought I was
writing those books
for other people, not myself.
And then I talked to
people all over the country
and from all walks
of life just to see
what the person on
the street thought
about death and the hereafter.
Their answers were proof that
I was not the only one thinking
about the big question.
>> I don't really believe in any
kind of afterlife of any kind.
I think when you die,
you go back to wherever
you were before you were born.
>> I hope that you go to heaven.
I think that you do.
I never thought there
was anything wrong
with just at least believing
that you go to heaven.
It's not going to
do you any harm.
So I hope so.
>> Yeah.
Well, I think that we're
spiritual beings that
have existed before this time
and exists beyond this time,
and this just
happens to be where
we're most aware of right now.
>> I really don't agree with
the whole life after death thing
because if it really
was life after death,
what's the point of
even being alive?
>> I think that there's
some sort of afterlife.
Your spirit goes somewhere.
Honestly, I don't know really.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In order to get a modern
day impression of this subject,
it is best to spend time with
the scientists who are studying
this phenomena now.
Perhaps the best
scientific work is
being done by Dr. Jeffrey Long.
We co-wrote the book "Evidence
of the Afterlife," which
is filled with his
astounding findings
about death and the beyond.
Yes, I did say beyond.
As the founder of the Near-death
Experience Research Foundation,
also known as
NDERF, Dr. Long has
investigated thousands of
near-death experience case
studies worldwide.
His conclusion?
There is most
definitely an afterlife.
>> The question, that really
important question of what
happens when we die, I certainly
have my opinion and have not
been shy about
sharing that opinion.
I think there is an
afterlife for all of us,
and I think that
afterlife is wonderful.
But I think what's
even more important
is why I believe that.
What evidence is there?
What is that line of thinking?
What is that chain of evidence?
What have we consistently
observed in multiple studies,
including the NDERF study,
that leads me to believe that?
And I think it's those nine
lines of evidence that,
to me personally, are
compelling evidence that we all
are going to have an afterlife,
that that is something that we
are all going to experience.
Our consciousness,
who we are, is going
to survive our bodily death.
And we're going to go on
into an afterlife, which
so many near-death
experiencers I've heard
from call it their real home.
One of the most significant
lines of evidence
I have that near-death
experiences prove
the existence of an afterlife
is the out-of-body observations
that near-death
experiencers make.
Nearly half of people who
have a near-death experience
will have an out-of-body state.
We'll call it an OBE.
During that time, their
consciousness rises up.
And usually from an
area above their body,
they can observe
both their own body--
often frantic resuscitation
efforts and other earthly
ongoing events going on--
again, at a time that they're
often clinically dead.
Part of my study was to look
at 617 near-death experiences.
We found 287 of those
near-death experiences involved
observations of earthly
everyday events at this time
when they were
unconscious or dead.
And to my considerable
surprise, we
found that an unbelievable 97.6%
of the time, every observation
that they were making,
everything that they
shared in our survey in their
narrative form was realistic.
In other words,
there was nothing
that seemed unrealistic
about their observations
of earthly events to either
the near-death experiencer
or to myself personally
looking over their narrative.
The number of people
that described
a near-death experience
while they're
undergoing general anesthetic.
To understand how
amazing that is,
understand that when you
have a cardiac arrest,
you have no potential for
a conscious experience.
But also, when you're
under general anesthesia,
you're under a blanket
of complete sleep.
You have no potential to
have any kind of memory,
any kind of conscious
awareness, because
of the general anesthesia.
But put the two
together, if you will,
there's doubly no reason
for you to have any memory
or any conscious experience.
And yet, that is when these
near-death experiencers
describe their experience.
We know that's true
because they typically
describe in the
out-of-body state
during their
near-death experience,
with their consciousness
above the body,
they see-- and some have
described dramatically--
their electro cardiogram,
a measure of heart
electrical activity, flatlining.
And there is the immediate
frantic resuscitation efforts
that they watch from their
ringside seat above their body.
And then as time
goes on, they go on
and have a typical
near-death experience.
But in our study, we found
23 near-death experiencers
that had their experiences
while under general anesthesia.
I compared 33 elements of the
near-death experience to other
NDEs--
that being experiences
not associated
with general anesthesia.
And the conclusion, the take
home lesson from my study
was the two groups of
near-death experiences
are essentially identical.
Absolutely amazing.
Near-death experiences
happen, and they
are typical near-death
experiences,
even if they occur under
general anesthesia.
To me personally,
I am astounded when
I encounter near-death
experiences that
occur in the blind that
involve vision, but especially
near-death experiencers
in those born blind.
I've interviewed at length
a near-death experiencer
who was born blind.
Never had any visual perception
during her entire life.
And yet, when she had a car
accident at the age of 22,
all of a sudden she had
vision and described
in great detail what her body
looked like in the emergency
room table below, went on to
describe a typically highly
visual experience.
And again, there's absolutely
no medical explanation
for this possible.
In my research, I
found that a fully 96%
of the time,
near-death experiencers
described meeting
familiar beings that they
knew from their earthly life,
that these beings were deceased
at the time of the
near-death experience.
And actually what's
interesting is
the number of
near-death experiences
where they encountered
somebody who seemed familiar,
but they didn't know who it was.
And only when the
near-death experiencer
looked at old family
portraits, all of a sudden,
they would go, a-ha,
that's the individual
from my near-death experience.
Say a great grandfather, a
great-great grandmother, people
that they never even
met in their life.
And yet there, by studying
old family portraits
later on after their experience,
suddenly connect the dots
and realize dramatically that
that was who they encountered.
We found in our study of
near-death experiences
not only from just
around the world,
but even in very
different cultures,
in non-Western cultures,
the core element
of near-death experience seems
to be basically the same.
Near-death experiences
are far more similar
than they are dissimilar.
It's amazing to think whether
you're an Arab in Saudi Arabia
or a Hindu in India or a
Christian in the United
States, the core NDE
experiments, what happens when
you nearly die, that elements
of the near-death experience
all seem to be the same.
This puts me out, if you
will, a little bit on a limb.
Here I am as a
physician who's actually
studied near-death experiences
and making an amazing claim
that the evidence is so
strong that, certainly to me,
it proves the existence
of an afterlife.
For thousands of years, the
great religions have said,
take on faith that we
have life after death.
Take on faith that there's more
than just what you see and live
in our earthly existence,
that you are more,
that you are a
magnificent being that
lives on and on after you die.
And you know the
incredible thing is?
For thousands of
years, that message
of faith in every shred of
research I have is validated.
In other words, it seems to
be true that there really
is life after death.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you want to find a
concentration of NDE-ers,
you might try going to
one of their conventions.
This one, the
International Association
of Near-Death Studies, is the
largest of the associations.
They get together every
year for fellowship
and lectures, and yes,
to tell their stories.
If you ever had doubt
that heaven awaits you,
a day at an IANDS
conference will erase that.
The NDE-ers in the group,
those who have actually
died and lived to
tell the tale, are
so anxious to tell
their story of death
and rebirth that they wear
a red dot on their name tags
so they can be recognized.
I nabbed the first four red
dots I saw and asked them
for interviews.
What I heard made my jaw drop.
First up was Martha St.
Claire from Salem, Oregon.
In 1974, she was water skiing
on the Sacramento River
when her arm got
wrapped in the rope.
She was dragged underwater
and nearly drowned.
>> I found myself going
through a dark tunnel.
It felt like I had
been there before,
and I had the sense
that I was going home.
There was gorgeous
flowers and colors--
and colors that you
don't see on Earth.
It's like I had my body, but
it wasn't a physical body.
It was kind of
like a light body.
I didn't really look
at my body, but I
sensed it was full of light.
And I found myself in
the universe, just stars
and galaxies, and it
felt completely normal,
like I was home.
Boom, I was just
back in my body.
There was, no, please, can I
come-- it wasn't any agreement.
Just boom, I'm back in my body.
And I didn't really know what
to do with my experience.
Back then, this
was a year before
any near-death experience
books had come out.
I had heard nothing about it.
And when I told my
family about it,
even though they could
see my arm was damaged,
they were like, that
didn't happen to you.
It frightened them.
They didn't want
to hear about it.
I really had no one
to talk to about it.
Now I have a
counseling practice,
and I comfort
people with hospice.
And the main thing about
my near-death experience
is that I've always felt my
whole life much more connected
to the other side.
But I'm always tuned in heaven.
I'm always tuned
into that energy.
I have no fear of
death whatsoever.
And I can't wait
to go home again.
Jesus said that, in My house,
there are many mansions.
If it were not so, I
would have told you so.
So I only tapped into a small
part of a huge universe,
you know?
But I believe there's
different places,
and that's why people go
to so many different levels
of consciousness.
So how do you know you
weren't just having
this hallucinogenic
high experience?
However, in my hippie days,
I've had some drug experiences.
Not extensive, but
enough to know this
was nothing like that.
And I've had acid.
Never was crazy about it.
Nothing like that.
There's nothing that compares to
this divine light that we see.
And the thing is, it
happens to our soul.
It happens to our soul.
So I feel glad I
can tell you that,
glad I can share it with you.
And I know it's true because
I've had the other experiences,
too.
>> Then there was Gary Guthrie,
who had a near-death experience
in 1982 in South Africa as the
result of a blood infection.
>> I became very sick,
and I thought, well,
this is just the
flu or something.
And New Year's Eve came, and
I spent the night partying
and went to bed about 3:00 AM.
And at 6:00 AM, I woke
up with tremendous--
the blood was really
getting to my heart
and was going awfully fast.
And it was at that moment where
I felt that I was going to die,
so I just prepared
myself to die.
And it was that moment that
I looked out of the window
and I saw the sky opening
and a light coming through.
20 minutes later, I
was just in tears,
and this was not normal for me.
And I realized that this
had been something divine.
Oh, the light was unlike
any light that you see here.
It was unlike any light I've
ever experienced before.
It was very loving
and very healing,
and it embraced you in
its warmth and its love.
It's nothing I had
ever experienced
before that or since.
I was 30 at the time.
I was teaching school,
teaching overseas.
I was working in the Philippines
and living a very Hugh Hefner
kind of life.
But the near-death
experience changed all that.
I began to think more deeply
about, well, why am I here,
and what is life all about?
And where do we go
after this life?
For about a week after
my near-death experience,
I had sort of a
vision, as I was going
about my daily
activities, of what life
could be like in South Africa.
I felt that people did
have a love for each other
and that they showed
kindness towards each other
and that there was a united
feeling among each other, which
on the surface wasn't true.
But I could see it as sort
of what the future is going
to be like in South Africa.
The light speaks to
people in different ways.
It's all-intelligent
so it's all-knowing.
So it knows the individual,
and it speaks to the individual
according to their individual
needs and their awareness
and their readiness to
accept a higher life.
>> Barbara Bartolomé of
Santa Barbara, California,
had a near-death experience
as the result of an injection
of dye during a
pre-surgical myelogram.
She left her body and saw vivid
details of the panicked events
to revive her.
>> The last thing I saw before
I passed out was him checking
to where his finger was on
the button and then realizing,
oh my god, I've got my
finger on the wrong button
and I've lowered her head.
And this look came across his
face, and then I passed out.
And the minute
that I passed out,
it literally was
shutting my eyes
in my body that was
there on the X-ray table
and then opening them and
being a different perspective
up on the ceiling.
The thought that
ran through my head
was, wow, if they're all
so upset and I'm up here
and my body is down
there, then I've died.
I saw them bring
in an oxygen cart,
and they put the
oxygen mask on my face.
And I saw who did that and
everything that was going on.
I saw them bring
in a heart monitor,
but I didn't know what it was.
And as I was looking down and
watching all this happening
and talking to God, who I
sensed was right there with me,
I wanted to see what that box
was that they had brought in.
And so I actually was able to
go from the ceiling over right
in front of--
my viewpoint changed to where I
was right in front of the box,
and I was watching the
line going across the box.
And it was just making this
monotone beeping sound,
and it was just going, beep.
At about four minutes
into that, they
decided that somehow
they couldn't
get the defib unit
in there in time,
and they had a conversation.
And the conversation
was, why don't you
try hitting her chest?
And everybody kind
of separated away
from the front of the table.
And he arced his
arm over his head,
and it came down and pounded
on the center of my chest.
So I watched that from above.
And the second time
he did that and arced
his arm over his head, then my
vision just shot from up above.
And when I blinked
open my eyes, I
had the oxygen mask on my
face and I was looking up
into everybody's faces.
I had this euphorial
feeling, this absolute thrill
to be back in my
body and feeling
so grateful that I was back,
and I wanted to express that.
So the minute they took
the oxygen mask off,
I said, oh my god, that was
an incredible experience.
I was up on the ceiling.
I watched you all, and
I could see everything
that was going on and hear you.
She put the oxygen mask on me.
He wheeled in that
heart monitor.
And I started
pointing out people
and what they had
done while I was dead.
And you guys were talking,
and you said this to him,
and he said that to you.
The orthopedic surgeon
stayed and comforted me,
and I told them
what had happened.
So everybody listened.
But then as I was wheeled up
to my room and after I was
stabilized-- and this was
the night before the surgery,
they did the surgery
the next day--
no one-- no one would talk to
me about it because they knew
that they had made an error and
what happened caused me to die,
and they were
afraid of a lawsuit.
And I didn't talk about
it for about 10 years.
But finally, a
friend of mine was
having someone near to her die.
And so it bubbled
up out of me, and I
realized it was my
reality all these years.
And I knew the story, but I
needed to talk to other people
to kind of help them
because it totally
eliminated my fear of death.
I don't really want to
be hurt before I die.
I want to be able
to have it be easy.
But the actual experience
takes away all fear
that you have of passing over.
>> And then there's
Jenny Sommers,
a graphic artist with
IBM in Tucson, Arizona.
As a young woman, Jenny
went to summer camp
with a number of her friends.
To play a joke on
the camp counselors,
Jenny ran into a building
that was under construction
and fell 15 feet down a hole
designed for a staircase.
It took rescuers almost an hour
to reach her comatose body.
By the time they did,
she was in the midst
of a deep near-death experience.
>> And evidently, I guess I had
died because they were talking
as if I couldn't hear them.
And I started to float
up out of my body,
and I was encased in this love.
It was just wonderful.
And I said, does everyone
get to experience this?
It's just marvelous.
And the answer was, yes.
And I said, even Hitler?
And, yes.
And I knew it had to be
true because that love is
so inclusive and so beyond
anything in this world.
The next thing I know, I'm
in front of three moving
kind of blobby shapes.
And one of them is my
great grandma Julia,
and she's telling me
I need to go back.
And they're saying,
you have to go back.
And I'm like, no, I'm
not going to go back.
So next thing I
know, I'm with Jesus.
And I kind of feel like I'm
in the principal's office,
and he's now telling
me, you don't
have to go back if
you don't want to.
I'm like, finally somebody
is listening to me.
I took back some
of my future events
that my family was
going to go through.
And so when I wake up from
the coma, I see my mom.
I say, mom, mom, you're
going to die in two years.
Not knowing I was in a
coma, not knowing they
said I had a 50-50
chance of survival now.
And so I didn't know the hell
that she had been through.
Well, she told me
that every time I
would wake up from recovery
and tell the story again,
I was forgetting more and more.
So now we're out of the
hospital, we're back home.
And she has a Raymond
Moody book in her hand,
and she said, tell me again
about me dying in two years.
And I said, what?
And I could see she was serious.
I said, wait, why are
you asking me that?
And she said, you told
me that in the hospital
I was going to die in two years.
I said, no, I didn't.
And I couldn't believe
she was telling me.
She closed the
Raymond Moody book.
She said she never wanted
to talk about it again.
Go fast forward two
years later, my mom dies.
She's in a car wreck
with my sister.
My sister was the driver,
but they got hit head-on.
And Teresa survives,
but my mom doesn't.
It's about reconnecting
to who we really are.
It's a universal mind
that we reconnect to.
It's kind of like here we're
unplugged from our source,
and we try to take
our plug and plug it
into each other and things.
This person is going
to make me happy.
This car is going
And we keep trying to draw
our energy from people,
things, this dimension.
And every time we take
that plug and we connect it
back to our source,
then we become full
and then we become connected.
And so now I realize I don't
need these outside things,
but I can be that light in
memory, that energy that
reminds people to not
plug into each other
but to plug into God.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Before leaving California, I
wanted to see my friend Leslie
Gant, one of the hosts from
the MSN program "Live Earth."
Leslie was hit by a
car in Washington DC
and nearly killed,
an event that she
reflected on when
we got together
near her home in Santa Monica.
>> A few years ago, I
was in Washington DC,
and I was riding
my bicycle home.
And a van hit me, and I flew
18 feet and shattered my jaw.
My cheekbone was broken.
And I had on my helmet, so thank
goodness I'm alive for that.
But if I didn't have on my
helmet, I would not be here.
And I've thought
a lot afterward,
oh my gosh, where
would I have gone?
And do other people
think about that?
Do other people
consider what happens
after this life is over?
>> Good question.
Does the man on the street
think about the afterlife?
We decided to find out by
visiting Santa Monica's Third
Street Promenade
to ask people we
met what happens when we die.
>> What are your perspectives
on life after death?
>> Oh, there's a great
life after death.
You're just here for
a while, and it's
better life after death.
Better land above.
>> Have you had any
experiences with that?
>> Yeah, I did.
When I was a kid, I had
a near-death experience.
I had my tonsils
being taken out.
And I just remember it was a
light tunnel, and the tunnel,
it takes you right up there.
And all the way in, it's
just this beautiful land
and everything's pretty,
and it was just perfect.
And all of sudden,
it just came back.
>> I don't have any
specific thoughts about it,
but I think that it has to be
something because everything
here, it can't just be as it is.
It has to have something more.
>> I fully believe that there
is something after we die,
but it's up to us if
we want to cross over.
>> Me, I think nothing happens.
I think that's
the cycle of life.
When people die, it's over with.
I don't think there is
any mystical ascension
or anything of that sort.
>> I guess I won't be
seeing him in heaven.
That's where I'm going.
So yeah, that's what
I think happens.
You do go to heaven or hell,
just depending on, I guess,
what you did through life.
So I guess I subscribe to
the Christian point of view.
>> I think about
the finality of it,
and I think about that I
don't want to think about it.
>> Well, I think
when people die,
it's just like
candle is blowed out.
People die as people die, and
the spirit cannot exist without
a body.
That's my thought.
>> I guess either you
go to heaven or hell.
What you do here
on Earth is what's
going to happen to
you after you die.
If you're good,
you go to heaven.
If you're bad, you
go to hell, I guess.
I know for a fact, yes.
>> Me personally,
my grandmother,
she said she had died
when she had my father.
So she told me about the tunnel,
but I didn't believe her.
And then I almost died.
I almost drowned when I
was like seven years old.
So I saw the tunnel,
but I woke up.
Swear to God.
>> So you just saw the tunnel?
>> Yeah.
And I just never made it.
>> Ah.
>> Just woke up.
>> Wow.
Did your life flash
before your eyes?
>> Definitely.
But I was small.
I was seven years old.
>> Oh, you were seven.
>> Seven years old.
>> And it's just
this endless thing,
just like here and right now,
like here in this interview,
and different stages.
And it's like the play
is always different.
It's always a different script.
It's always a different movie.
But it's the same soul
always going through.
So that's what I believe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I arrived at Dr. Raymond
Moody's house in Deep South
Alabama.
Raymond, how's it going?
>> Hi, Paul.
Good to see you, man.
>> Hey, man.
>> How you been?
>> Good.
I'm here to talk to you
about the afterlife.
>> Yeah?
Well, that's my
favorite subject.
>> OK, let's do it.
>> Let's go talk about it.
>> In the early '70s, Dr. Moody,
then a philosophy professor
trained at the
University of Virginia,
began to explore the stories
of people who had almost died
and crossed the line
into a heavenly realm.
These stories have been told
throughout human history,
but Dr. Moody was the first
to dissect them and discover
their similarities.
He called them
near-death experiences.
When he wrote about these
in a book "Life After Life,"
the field of near-death
studies began.
I have written four
books with Raymond.
I even helped him move into
his home here in rural Alabama.
So I felt very comfortable
interviewing him
in his living room.
But even as well
as I know Raymond,
I was surprised by
some of his answers.
You've had your own
near-death experience.
And based on those
two things, the fact
that you've heard
all these stories
and you have your own story
to tell, what do you think
happens when we die?
>> What I think happens
when we die is that we enter
into another state of
existence or another state
of consciousness that is so
extraordinarily different from
the spatial and temporal frame
of reality in which we exist
in the physical world that the
language we have is not yet
adequate to describe this
other state of existence
or consciousness.
>> When we leave our mortal
body, how do we leave it?
What do we look like?
>> People say that in the
realm of existence they enter
into upon the point of death
that there is no such thing
as physicality as we
experience in this realm.
It's not that they
have a physical body.
It's rather that they have
some other sort of vehicle,
which they find it very
difficult to describe,
but that it does have a form,
that it carries a personality,
but that it's just entirely
impossible to describe it
in terms of or analogously to
the kind of body that we have.
I've heard it characterized as
a spiritual body, for example.
That's a term that I hear
from a lot of people.
>> So when they come
back, they're changed.
They're transformed.
>> There are a number of
transformations we see with
people who come back from
near-death experiences.
The most prominent
one is that whatever
they had been chasing
before, whether knowledge
or fame or power or money or
any of these other things,
that when they
come back, they say
that the most important thing
we can do while we're alive
is to learn how to love.
>> How has this knowledge
affected your life?
>> The most powerful one to
me has been that it really has
convinced me of the
importance of love,
and I try in every day
to be loving to people.
I genuinely do try in my
day-to-day interactions
with people, that I try to keep
in mind that I will be seeing
this again and that I will
be seeing this event not
from the way I'm seeing
it now through these eyes,
but that I will be
seeing this event
through the eyes of the people
with whom I've interacted.
>> How do you think the world
would change if you were able
to prove that there
was an afterlife?
>> Many people get to thinking
about this, and they think, oh,
if that were the case, then
we'd all love each other.
And there would be
nirvana, and there wouldn't
be any problems in the world.
But I don't think it
would bring people
to a state of complete love and
make everybody saints and so
on.
I honestly don't accept that.
But there is one thing
that I am absolutely
sure that a rational proof
of life after death would do,
and that would be that
it would fundamentally
alter the structure
of the human mind.
If we could have a rational
proof of life after death,
then human beings
would never again
be the same because the entire
structure of our cognitive mind
would be expanded.
What I can honestly tell you
from the bottom of my heart
is that I accept
that there is a God
and I have a
relationship with God
and I talk with
Him all the time.
What I honestly don't know yet
from the rational point of view
is whether life after death
is in His plan or not.
And it may well be, if you
think about it, that God
has something in
mind for us that
is even more
remarkable than what we
might call a life after death.
In other words, I love God.
I have a trusting
relationship with God.
He hasn't told me anything
yet about an afterlife.
I'm just going to
have to wait and see.
>> The next day,
I went back to Dr.
Moody's to talk to him about
his next field of study--
shared death experiences.
He feels this subject may
provide the best answer yet
to the question, what
happens when we die?
Simply stated, shared
death experiences
take place when
bystanders at the deathbed
have the same experience
as the person who is dying.
Sometimes they say that
they went up a tunnel
or had a life review
with the dying person.
>> Now the implication of
this, if you think about it,
is that this really does
throw a monkey wrench
in the traditional way of
debating about near-death
experiences.
Because what the
physiologists tell
us, who say that these
experiences are hallucinatory,
is that as the person is
dying, the oxygen supply
to their brain is lowered.
And hence, they have these
hallucinatory effects.
But if that's true, why
would the bystanders
have the same kind
of experience?
>> Sure.
Well, why would they?
>> That's very
difficult to explain.
And I think that once these
findings come out and are
thoroughly understood
by the public,
we're going to be into
an entirely new dimension
of discussing
near-death experiences
because that old
stand-by, that, oh,
this is just hallucinations
caused by brain damage, that's
out the window with these
empathic death experiences.
>> Now if you don't
mind me saying this,
you and your family had a shared
death experience at the bedside
of your mother.
>> I did indeed.
In 1994, when my
mother was dying,
my wife and I and my sisters
and one of my brother in-laws
were there, and all had
astonishing experiences
at the moment my mother died.
>> I think it's one of the
most exciting fields to study.
>> Oh yes, Paul.
>> The study of
afterlife studies,
I think this is one
of the most exciting--
>> Paul, this is the new
frontier of knowledge.
Because now we have
not only this awareness
that these near-death
experiences are not
confined to the people who
almost die, but kind of leak
out by whatever unknown means
to the people standing around.
And it is a very paradoxical
and astonishing thing
to wonder what is going on here.
>> "Men love to wonder,"
said Ralph Waldo Emerson,
"and that is the
seed of science."
I am reminded of
that quote whenever
I am with Raymond Moody.
For half of his
life and counting,
the good doctor has pursued
the big question of religion,
science, and philosophy--
what happens when we die?
But there are people out
there, millions of them,
of all races, creeds,
colors, and religion
who don't need a
scientific answer.
They know from experience.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I traveled to the
Pacific Northwest
to visit Galen Dean Loven.
At the age of 11, Galen
took it upon himself
to prove to a neighbor that
gasoline burns on water.
He filled a 5-gallon gas can
from the family farm's gas tank
and went down to a nearby
creek to make his point.
>> I was standing on these
two logs pouring the gasoline
upstream, so the gasoline
is flowing underneath me.
And I look over, and
there is my friend
approaching the creek
with a lit match.
And the look on his face was--
I would say horror.
He was doing something he
didn't really mean to do,
but could not do.
>> In a hot second, Galen
was covered by gasoline
and engulfed in flames.
The pain was so intense that
young Galen could feel nothing.
He collapsed into
the water, where
his voyage to the
other side began.
>> My next awareness is I'm
horizontal with my hands
by my side in a funnel.
It was not really a tunnel,
but it was a funnel.
And the inclination of the
sides was not that great,
but it was obvious.
And I was horizontal dead
center, and I was moving along.
And I was aware of my body.
My whole body was there.
I could look and see,
and it was physical, OK?
It was very physical.
And inside the cone was--
it wasn't a vacuum,
but it wasn't anything
in particular other
than something.
I knew outside of this funnel
there was more substance.
It felt more solid on the
outside of the funnel.
I'm moving along a bit
and then look ahead,
and I see this
little tiny pinpoint
of light, a little white light.
And at that point, my
speed really picks up.
So I'm accelerating like crazy.
It's not that I reach a fast
speed and stay at that speed,
but every millisecond, I'm
moving faster and faster
and faster and faster.
As I'm doing that, the
sides of the funnel
are expanding away from me.
I'm still dead center.
I'm still physical.
I'm still able to look around.
And this feeling of excitement,
this feeling of anticipation,
this feeling of joy
was just overcoming me.
It was almost bursting out
of my chest, it felt so good.
And just at that point
when I'm almost there--
I mean, this light is big,
the sides of the funnel
is pretty much gone, And
I'm almost in the light--
wham, I wake up in the
bottom of the stream.
And I am just furious.
That was my first
instant reaction.
Even before I really was
aware that I had slime
in my mouth and
everything else was
I was just pissed
that I was here.
>> Galen raised out of the water
and began to assess the damage
to his burn-ravaged body.
Sheets of skin hung from his
arms, exposing bone and muscle.
From a vantage point
outside of his body,
he watched as he ran to
the farmhouse to get help.
Rushed to the hospital
in Edmonton, Canada,
Galen was lucky to find that
two burn surgeons from Houston
were visiting to give
a seminar on the latest
treatment of petroleum burns.
Within minutes,
Galen was in surgery.
>> I looked like a
toasted marshmallow.
Of any war pictures you've seen,
napalm victims or whatever,
they have no
discernible features,
they're just a bloated mass,
that's what I looked like.
I had no mouth,
no ears, no eyes.
I couldn't see.
The IV was hooked
up into my foot
because that was
the only place they
could find any place to put it.
And I was on a morphine drip
for the next four weeks.
>> Through months in the
hospital and years of pain
and surgery, Galen continued
to think about his journey
in the tunnel and his near
encounter with the light.
Death revealed its
nature to Galen
and gave him special knowledge.
Listen.
>> I would say that's the first
time I became consciously aware
that we live beyond
this life, OK?
I absolutely knew that.
So from that point on, death
had nothing, no hold over me
at all.
I was fearless.
Probably pushed the envelope
more than once, right?
But I also found out
I became really good
with people who were dying.
I could just be around them.
I didn't have to
do anything at all.
They just felt better.
And I thought, oh,
isn't that interesting?
It's probably because I
never really came back.
My trip was interrupted.
And I always thought
up until recently,
I always had one foot
on the other side,
straddling the fence of life.
And so what I
absolutely am certain of
is that whatever it is that we
do after this moment of time,
it is a good thing.
It's peaceful.
It's joyous.
It's harmonious.
It's exciting.
It's a higher level
of intellectual being,
if you want to call it that.
And there is a connectivity
there to this larger universe
than we have here now.
>> Galen says he isn't waiting
for science to make a decision
for him.
He believes in the
afterlife and has
no fear of dying when
his contract is up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The same is true
of Lupita Kirkland.
At the age of 13,
Lupita and her family
traveled to Acapulco for
her coming out party.
When Lupita and her family
checked into the hotel,
they were treated to a concert
just below their eighth floor
balcony.
One of Lupita's sisters
recommended that they
run to the lobby and watch.
Lupita did just that.
But unbeknownst to her, someone
had closed the sliding glass
door going back into the room.
Lupita ran through
the door, which
shattered into sharp
shards and covered her
with a thousand cuts.
>> I saw a lot of blood, like
somebody's pouring a full host
full of blood all
over the place.
And so my dad grabbed me,
and he put me in the bed
and he wrapped the blouse
to compress on my wound.
And because I have
wounds all over my veins,
he asked me just to hold him so
I could cover the wounds here
in my arms.
And I realized that
I was going to die.
So I told my dad
that I'm going to die
Today.
I saw my body in the distance,
and I was in the room.
And I had the vision of
my mom getting the doctor,
and she was
screaming and crying.
And I felt sorry for her.
I wanted to console her and
let her know that I was OK.
Even though I was afraid
at the first moment
when I was detached
from my body,
an overwhelming sense of
peace came all over me.
And I knew I was OK, that
I was going back home.
And I wanted to share that
with my parents that I was OK,
but I couldn't talk
to them anymore.
And I saw my dead body
just laying there.
And the doctor came, and
I remember him saying,
oh my god, she's not
going to make it.
I saw the tunnel.
It seemed to be
made of dark clouds.
At the end of the tunnel,
there was a light.
At the end of that light, I
saw the image of what I believe
is the Virgin Mary.
And I was reviewing
my life with her,
and we spoke about
my mission in life.
And after that, we had
spoken about me coming back
because I realized that my
mission was not complete
and that I needed to go back.
So finally, I was
pulled back like, smack,
with this reaction.
And I felt how my soul
enter into my body,
like it was strong.
And I was feeling how the
doctor was performing the CPR.
And I remember the
huge pain in my chest,
and all the pain, the physical
pain, came back to my body
after I came back.
And I was trying to get all
the air I could into my lungs,
like I could not have enough
air, and the doctor saying,
she made it.
She's back.
Let's start stitching.
>> The doctor had no anesthesia,
so young Lupita was forced
to suffer through the painful,
but necessary ordeal of being
sutured with no painkiller.
>> They had to stitch
four layers in my neck,
and he started with the aorta.
And it was a very
painful experience,
which I was literally
screaming and thinking--
it was a mix of feelings between
not wanting this pain again,
sad for having to come
back, but at the same time,
I was mesmerized by
the whole experience.
After I started to talk
about my experience,
I told my parents that
I knew the doctor met
my mom by the third floor.
And my mom was in shock,
like, who told you this?
And I said, I saw it.
And she said, no,
somebody told you.
No, I saw it.
So they could not believe
what was happening.
So I said, I need to go back
and thank him for what he did.
So we went back to
Acapulco a year later.
We went to the address, and
particularly in that address,
there was no house.
Everything was
like an empty lot.
And there were houses around,
so we started to look around
for him and ask for his
name, Jesús or Jesus.
I never found him.
>> How has this affected your
life in the intervening years?
>> I didn't come back the same.
I was a different person.
I was more spiritual.
And also, I became a more
compassionate person,
concerned for others, and
feeling a sense of love.
You're not going to die.
This is just a transition.
You're going to see and
you're going to meet home,
and you'll be fine.
Take all the love that you
have gotten here in this world
and just remember
those beautiful moments
and take them with you
and share them with God.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> New Orleans has been
called many things,
from an ingrown self-obsessed
little city to a place that can
drive a sober-minded
person insane.
The religious and the profane
love this noisy drunken city
on the Mississippi because it
confirms their mutual belief
that the likes of Sodom is
alive and well in the world.
And both camps can definitely
agree that this American city
made it through a
near-death experience
at the hands of a
hurricane named Katrina.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And it is here in this city
of death and resurrection
that I brought together our
scholars of the afterlife,
Raymond Moody and Jeffrey
Long, to summarize
their feelings on mankind's
greatest question--
what happens when we die?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I brought you here
to New Orleans
to talk about the
afterlife, namely
what happens when we die.
What does your research
tell us about that?
And also, what you
can talk to people
about who are afraid
of death, what
you can say to them because
you're both the experts.
>> Well, Paul, I can say
positively that I think we do
know a little bit about the
entranceway to the afterlife
now.
We know that initially
people go through experience
of seeming to leave their body,
going into a realm of light,
seeing their relatives
who've passed away,
reviewing everything
they've ever done.
And as this extends,
I gather they
are able to continue their
intellectual pursuits.
And also, that love
seems to be almost
the foundational organizational
principle in the afterlife,
that we still maintain
love and that we still
have our personal identities
to some degree intact.
>> Absolutely fantastic,
the research we're doing.
Certainly in humility,
I would point out
that what we don't know far
exceeds what we do know.
And yet, what I consider to be
so positive about the research
I've been doing
is that we're now
at least connecting
some of the dots,
developing some understandings.
And some of the understandings
that we're coming to
are absolutely remarkable.
I think they could literally
change the world in terms
of their impact on people.
If people could just know what
we know, that we don't really
die, that there is an
afterlife, it's for all of us,
it's wonderful, and that we
don't have to fear death.
>> You guys have taken
the research so far.
I mean, I'm curious
to know what you can
say to people who fear death.
>> We have every right to say
to people that you don't need
to fear death.
This gives a great
basis from which
to work with patients
on their fears of death
because this is
solid information now
that does convey hope.
And that people who have lost
a loved one to death, which
is the worst pain
that life can bring,
can be comforted now by
the fact, as I regard it,
that there is a world
beyond in which we
can be reunited and continuing
our relationship with our loved
ones.
>> And, Paul, I think in the
books that we've all written
together, what I think is most
important is that this is not
wishful thinking.
This is not speculation.
This is solid evidence based
on solid principles, research
with scientific basis.
And it's with that underpinning,
with that knowledge that we've
gained through our
research over the years
that we can have that
confidence in saying,
yes, there is an afterlife.
>> And there it is.
Maybe the void we all fear
at death isn't a void at all,
but instead a gateway
to an afterlife.
Perhaps our death is,
as Dr. Moody said,
an experience of
love and learning
so unique that we can't perceive
it without the help of God.
Perhaps at death, our
life has just begun.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What do you think
happens when we die?
>> I think when we die that
we go on to another lifetime.
And I think that
whatever happens in
that lifetime absolutely
has to do with karma
from your previous life.
And whatever you give
in your life today,
I think you're going to
wind up with whatever
you gave in the previous
life in the next life.
>> Oh, I think when you die,
your soul just basically goes
to heaven or hell.
And it depends on how you
live your life that determines
basically where you go.
So hopefully, mine
will go to heaven.
>> What do you think
happens when you die?
>> OK, I don't think anything
happens after you die.
>> You just die?
>> You just die.
>> Soul goes nowhere?
>> No.
>> No?
What do you think
happens when you die?
>> Heaven or hell, but
I'm going to heaven.
One day, I'm going to get on
track where my beliefs actually
line up to what I'm doing.
But that's just my beliefs.
>> What do you think
happens when you die?
>> Your body goes to the ground,
your soul goes to heaven.
That's your other life.
It's called the land
of milk of honey.
Jesus promised,
whosoever believe
in me shall set at my
right side of my Father.
That's in the Bible.
>> I think when you
die, you're happy.
That's what I think.
[MUSIC PLAYING]